---
title: ARM DEVSUMMIT 2022
event: ARMDEVSUMMIT2022
event_url: https://devsummit.arm.com/flow/arm/devsummit22/home/page/lp
description: This online event is for individuals and organizations developing
  and deploying on Arm-based hardware.
visual_date: |-
  October 26: Keynotes and Masterclasses

  November 8-9: Live Workshops From Arm and Industry Experts
location: Online
date: 2022-10-20 02:42:52 +02:00
event_date: 2022-10-26 04:00:00 +02:00
event_end_date: 2022-11-09 02:42:52 +01:00
image: /assets/images/content/hero-img-desktop_1664437089033001bfw3.png
event_type: tech_days
---
### Explore Workshops and Masterclasses by Topic

40+ hours of content will be released on October 26 and live workshops will be running from November 8-9, 2022.



### The Event for Future Builders

From the sensor to the smartphone and the supercomputer. The future is built on Arm.
At this action-packed online event, join hands-on workshops and masterclasses. \
Share your ideas and connect with Arm's global technology community to optimize the performance, scalability, and speed of your projects.



### Companies Presenting

Learn From the Most Innovative Technology Companies

Google/ Microsoft/ AWS/ Edge Impulse/ Redhat/Oracle.
56K.Cloud/ Alif Semiconductor/ Ampere Computing/ Apex.ai/ Balena.io/ Bosch/ Canonical/
Carnegie Mellon University/ CircleCI/ Connect 5G/ CoreAVI/Cosmonic/Elotl/EnactTrust/
Exelfore/ Fortifyedge/ Green Hills Software/ Infineon Technologies/ loTeX/ Klara Inc./
LDRA Technologies/ Linaro/ Luxoft/ Magma Core Foundation/ Memfault/Meta/
Minerva Systems/ NXP/ Phluido/ Qualcomm/ Renesas/ Rockwell Automation/ Scalys/ Sensory/ Siemens/ Silicon Laboratories/ Sofar Ocean Technologies/ Synopsys/ Sysdig/ Tetrate/ TIER IV/ Tech Mahindra/ Twilio/ VectorCamp PC/ VMWare/ Wind River.



### Arm is Defining the Future of Computing and So Are You!

If you're building loT, automotive, mobile, cloud and 5G solutions or any
other leading-edge innovation, you're probably already developing or
deploying on Arm-based hardware. We want to give you, the future
builders, the insights and skills to do your best work.