# Development Tools

Development Tools are key in getting the most performance and utility out of the underlying hardware. Linaro Developer Services has the experts to make that happen. We specialise in domains of compilers, language runtimes and virtualization, which deliver world class products and services around the development toolchain by leveraging the best Open Source technologies.

Compilers and their tuning are central to getting the best performance from cutting edge hardware. This ranges from end to end development and tuning of compiler backends for new hardware, to optimizing and tuning compilers for microarchitecture variations in existing hardware. There are also special cases in application software that benefit from tuning the compiler for specific workloads, or even implementing industry and academic research to the benefit of these workloads. 

Open Source compilers such as gcc and LLVM lead the global market. Tuning of compilers goes hand in hand with ensuring that the environments in which applications run are optimal - runtime libraries and environments are key to this experience. Runtime libraries such as the GNU C Library, uClibc and newlib are used extensively in industry standard operating systems and Linaro Developer Services has the expertise to enhance these libraries to ensure that they provide the most optimal environment for your applications. This expertise extends to the cloud, where emulation environments such as Qemu influence the runtime behaviour of applications.

The ability to diagnose problems in applications and fix them is perhaps the most important part of application development process. Linaro has considerable influence in the Open Source community and can cater to your requirements for software debugging and tracing by enhancing and customizing proven software such as gdb, valgrind and systemtap among others.

Expertise in Linaro is not just deep, it extends across a range of computing platforms. Our toolchain services’ offerings start with the smallest of computing devices with IoT, continue on to development toolchains for Android and go all the way up to developing and maintaining development tools and solutions for Enterprise platforms.
